Add more detailed docs for ZenML Pro (#3065)
zenml-io/zenml: docs/book/getting-started/system-architectures.md

---
description: Different variations of the ZenML architecture depending on your needs.
---

# 🏛️ System Architecture

This guide walks through the various ways that ZenML can be deployed, from self-hosted OSS, to
SaaS, to self-hosted ZenML Pro!

## ZenML OSS (Self-hosted)

{% hint style="info" %}
This page is intended as a high level overview. To learn more about how about to deploy ZenML OSS,
read [this guide](../getting-started/deploying-zenml/README.md).
{% endhint %}

> A ZenML OSS deployment (AKA a tenant) consists of the following moving pieces:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A ZenML OSS deployment consists of the following moving pieces:
```

you make the distinction a few lines down

* **ZenML OSS Server**: This is a FastAPI app that manages metadata of pipelines, artifacts, stacks etc.

>   Note: In ZenML Pro, the notion of a ZenML server is replaced with so-called "Tenant". For

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Note: In ZenML Pro, the notion of a ZenML server is replaced with what is known as a "Tenant". For
```

>   all intents and purposes, consider a ZenML Tenant == ZenML OSS server + more functionality. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  all intents and purposes, consider a ZenML Tenant to be a ZenML OSS server that comes with more functionality. 
```

* **OSS Metadata Store**: This is where all ZenML tenant metadata is stored, including
  ML metadata such as tracking and versioning information about pipelines and
  models.
* **OSS Dashboard**: This is a ReactJS app that shows pipelines, runs, etc.
* **Secrets Store**: All secrets and credentials required to access customer
  infrastructure services are stored in a secure secrets store. The ZenML Pro
  API has access to these secrets and uses them to access customer
  infrastructure services on behalf of the ZenML Pro. The secrets store can be
  hosted either by the ZenML Pro or by the customer.

![ZenML OSS server deployment architecture](../.gitbook/assets/oss_simple_deployment.png)

ZenML OSS is free with Apache 2.0 license. Learn how to deploy it [here](./deploying-zenml/README.md).

{% hint style="info" %}

> To learn more about the core concepts for ZenML OSS, go [here](../getting-started/core-concepts.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To learn more about the core concepts for ZenML OSS, go [here](../getting-started/core-concepts.md).
```

{% endhint %}

## ZenML Pro (SaaS or Self-hosted)

{% hint style="info" %}

> If you're interested in assessing ZenML Pro SaaSs, you can create

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you're interested in assessing ZenML Pro SaaS, you can create
```

{% endhint %}

### ZenML Pro SaaS Architecture

![ZenML Pro SaaS deployment with ZenML secret store](../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_scenario_1.png)

For the ZenML Pro SaaS deployment case, all ZenML services are hosted on infrastructure hosted by the ZenML Team.
Customer secrets and credentials required to access customer infrastructure are
stored and managed by the ZenML Pro Control Plane.

On the ZenML Pro infrastructure, only ML _metadata_ (e.g. pipeline and
model tracking and versioning information) is stored. All the actual ML data
artifacts (e.g. data produced or consumed by pipeline steps, logs and
visualizations, models) are stored on the customer cloud. This can be set up
quite easily by configuring
an [artifact store](../component-guide/artifact-stores/artifact-stores.md)
with your MLOps stack.

Your tenant only needs permissions to read from this data to display artifacts
on the ZenML dashboard. The tenant also needs direct access to parts of the
customer infrastructure services to support dashboard control plane features
such as CI/CD, triggering and running pipelines, triggering model deployments

> etc.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and so on.
```

The advantage of this setup is that it is a fully-managed service, and is
very easy to get started with. However, for some clients even some metadata

> can be sensitive: These clients should refer to the other architecture diagram.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
can be sensitive; these clients should refer to the other architecture diagram.
```

<details>

<summary>Detailed Architecture Diagram for SaaS deployment</summary>

<figure><img src="../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_saas_detailed.png" alt="ZenML Pro Full SaaS deployment"><figcaption>ZenML Pro Full SaaS deployment with ZenML secret store</figcaption></figure>

</details>

We also offer a hybrid SaaS option where customer secrets are stored on the
customer side. In this case, the customer connects their own
secret store directly to the ZenML server that is managed by us. All ZenML
secrets used by running pipelines to access infrastructure services and
resources are stored in the customer secret store. This allows users to
use [service connectors](../how-to/auth-management/service-connectors-guide.md)
and the [secrets API](../how-to/interact-with-secrets.md) to authenticate

> ZenML pipelines and the ZenML Pro to 3rd party services and infrastructure

Reviewer: ```suggestion
ZenML pipelines and the ZenML Pro to third-party services and infrastructure
```

while ensuring that credentials are always stored on the customer side.
{% endhint %}

![ZenML Pro SaaS deployment with Customer secret store](../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_scenario_1_1.png)

<details>

<summary>Detailed Architecture Diagram for SaaS deployment with custom secret store configuration</summary>

<figure><img src="../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_saas_detailed_2.png" alt="ZenML Pro Full SaaS deployment with custom secret store"><figcaption>ZenML Pro Full SaaS deployment with customer secret store</figcaption></figure>

</details>

### ZenML Pro Self-Hosted Architecture

![ZenML Pro self-hosted deployment](../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_scenario_2.png)

In this scenario, all services, data, and secrets are deployed on the customer

> cloud. This is the opposite of Scenario 1, and is meant for customers who

Reviewer: We haven't mentioned scenarios in the document yet, so it feels a bit out of place...

require completely airgapped deployments, for the tightest security standards. 
[Reach out to us](mailto:cloud@zenml.io) if you want to set this up.

<details>

<summary>Detailed Architecture Diagram for self-hosted ZenML Pro deployment</summary>

<figure><img src="../.gitbook/assets/cloud_architecture_self_hosted_detailed.png" alt="ZenML Pro self-hosted deployment details"><figcaption>ZenML Pro self-hosted deployment details</figcaption></figure>

</details>

Are you interested in ZenML Pro? [Sign up](https://cloud.zenml.io/?utm\_source=docs\&utm\_medium=referral\_link\&utm\_campaign=cloud\_promotion\&utm\_content=signup\_link)

> and get access to Scenario 1. with a free 14 day trial now!

Reviewer: same here with the scenario....

> and get access to Scenario 1. with a free 14 day trial now!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and get access to Scenario 1. with a free 14-day trial now!
```
